Article/registration and authentication in your django app with dj rest auth part 2 (#189)
rootstrap/blog: content/Registration and Authentication in your Django app with dj-rest-auth part 2 - Bruno Michetti.md

...

urlpatterns = [
    ...
    path(
        'dj-rest-auth/registration/account-confirm-email/<str:key>/',
        ConfirmEmailView.as_view(),
    ), # Needs to be defined before the registration path
    path('dj-rest-auth/registration/', include('dj_rest_auth.registration.urls')),
    path('dj-rest-auth/account-confirm-email/', VerifyEmailView.as_view(), name='account_email_verification_sent'),
    ...
]

```

That path needs to be there to avoid a template error in dj-rest-auth. As mentioned in the previous part, dj-rest-auth it's an open source software and sometimes we can find some errors. The good part of this is that anyone can address the discovered bugs.  
Having this configuration, the user will be redirected to the login page after clicking in the received link. Don't forget to set the `LOGIN_URL` parameter in your settings, otherwise you can get an error if the default value is not a valid URL of your app. During development, you can set the `LOGIN_URL` as the login endpoint; remember that dj-rest-auth has browsable endpoints thanks to django-rest-framework. So you can test sign-up flow by setting for example:

```python
# Your settings file
...

> LOGIN_URL = 'http://localhost:8000/dj-rest-auth/login'

Author: Are you sure? I've tested with LOGIN_URL

    ...
]

```

That path needs to be there to avoid a template error in dj-rest-auth. As mentioned in the previous part, dj-rest-auth it's an open source software and sometimes we can find some errors. The good part of this is that anyone can address the discovered bugs.  
Having this configuration, the user will be redirected to the login page after clicking in the received link. Don't forget to set the `LOGIN_URL` parameter in your settings, otherwise you can get an error if the default value is not a valid URL of your app. During development, you can set the `LOGIN_URL` as the login endpoint; remember that dj-rest-auth has browsable endpoints thanks to django-rest-framework. So you can test sign-up flow by setting for example:

```python
# Your settings file
...
LOGIN_URL = 'http://localhost:8000/dj-rest-auth/login'
```

Now we need to specify to Django the email backend that is in charge of sending the emails. To locally test the signup feature during development, you can set:

```python
# Your settings file
...
EMAIL_BACKEND = 'django.core.mail.backends.console.EmailBackend'

```

> In this case the email won't be sent, it will be printed in the console instead. By default, you will see something like this after a successful registration:

Reviewer: The email, at least from a django point of view will be sent. maybe we can rephrase this.

## Registration and Authentication in your Django app with dj-rest-auth (part 2)

In the [first part of this blog post](link-to-part-1) I've presented the dj-rest-auth package that allows us to handle registration and authentication through REST API endpoints with a minimal configuration.
I've also talked about different customizations that you can take advantage of.

> When I started to use this package I had to face some problems. The roots of those problems were partly because I was learning Django and partly because dj-rest-auth has many features and possibilities for each feature that the first time is used it can lead to some confusion. So the main goal of the second part is to show you more examples and give you some tips.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When I started to use this package I faced some problems because I was learning Django and dj-rest-auth offers many features and possibilities for each feature. This is why the first users may experience some confusion. I will be sharing more examples and give you some tips.  
```

> Let's continue with the example of the `CustomUser` shown in the previous part, with no username, unique email, a gender and a phone number attribute. First I will show you how to implement email validation at signup, and how to customize the emails that are sent by your app. Then I will talk about the reset password functionality, and finally how to customize the templates with your own desired values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's continue with the example of the `CustomUser` shown in the previous part, with no username, unique email, gender, and phone number attribute. First I will show you how to implement email validation at signup, and how to customize the emails that are sent by your app. Then I will talk about the reset password functionality, and finally how to customize the templates with your own desired values.
```

```python
# Your settings file
...
LOGIN_URL = 'http://localhost:8000/dj-rest-auth/login'
```

Finally, you need to specify to Django the email backend that is in charge of sending the emails of your app.

#### Email backend

The [Django email backend](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/3.1/topics/email/#email-backends) is the component that handles the sending of an email. You can choose among different possibilities that Django provides. The most common are SMTP and console backend.

You can configure an SMTP server by adding:

```python
# Your settings file
...

EMAIL_BACKEND = 'django.core.mail.backends.smtp.EmailBackend'
EMAIL_HOST = 'your.email.host'
EMAIL_USE_TLS = True
EMAIL_PORT = 587
EMAIL_HOST_USER = 'your email host user'
EMAIL_HOST_PASSWORD = 'your email host password'
```

> You have to choose the `EMAIL_HOST`, for example `'smtp.gmail.com'`. In the `EMAIL_HOST_USER` and `EMAIL_HOST_PASSWORD` parameters put the information of the account that will be the email sender. If you are using gmail as mail server you will need to allow less secure apps and display unlock captcha. After this, your Django app will send verification emails for all the new users. I recommend you to use environment variables to keep sensitive information in your settings such as keys, the email host account and its password, etc.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You have to choose the `EMAIL_HOST`, for example `'smtp.gmail.com'`. In the `EMAIL_HOST_USER` and `EMAIL_HOST_PASSWORD` parameters put the information of the account that will be the email sender. If you are using Gmail as a mail server you will need to allow less secure apps and display unlock captcha. After this, your Django app will send verification emails for all the new users. I recommend you to use environment variables to keep sensitive information in your settings such as keys, the email host account, and its password, etc.  
```

page and choose a new password:" %} {% block reset_link %} {{ protocol }}://{{
domain }}{% url 'password_reset_confirm' uidb64=uid token=token %} {% endblock
%} {% translate 'Your username, in case you’ve forgotten:' %} {{
user.get_username }} {% translate "Thanks for using our site!" %} {%
blocktranslate %}The {{ site_name }} team{% endblocktranslate %} {%
endautoescape %}
```

As said in the email validation section, remember to keep some of the needed variables in the template. In this case the most important is the `url` with the `uid` and the `token` that are required to update the user's password.  
 After these steps, you have finished the reset password functionality customization! Taking the previous section into account, your project folder would be now like this one:

```
root-project-folder
    |__myapp
    |    |__templates
    |        |__account
    |        |   |__email
    |        |        |__email_confirmation_message.txt
    |        |__registration
    |            |__password_reset_email.html
    |
    ...
```

Let's see in the last section how we can modify some of the default variables used in the templates.

### Customize variables used in the templates

> Let's think about this example: What if you want to modify the URL sent by default in the reset password email template? Well, Django allows you to define variables to be used in the templates by creating your own template tags. First thing you need to do, is to define the custom value desired for the URL in your settings:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's think about this example: What if you want to modify the URL sent by default in the reset password email template? Well, Django allows you to define variables to be used in the templates by creating your own template tags. The first thing you need to do is define the custom value desired for the URL in your settings:
```

    return getattr(settings, name)
```

Finally, go to your customized email template that you have created to overwrite the default one, and load the defined value by adding `{% load password_reset_template_load %}` at the top of the file, and after that add the line that has the custom value (in this case don't forget the `uid` and `token`):

```html
// Your template {% load password_reset_template_load %} ... {% get_settings_var
'CUSTOM_PASSWORD_RESET_CONFIRM' %}?uidb64={{ uid }}&token={{ token }}
```

With these settings you have defined your custom template tags. I'm going to show you the final project structure with all the customization that I talked about:

```
root-project-folder
    |__myapp
    |    |__templates
    |    |   |__account
    |    |   |   |__email
    |    |   |        |__email_confirmation_message.txt
    |    |   |__registration
    |    |       |__password_reset_email.html
    |    |__templatetags
    |        |__password_reset_template_load.py
    ...
```

From now on, the email for password reset will show a customized URL. Remember that this was an example, you can create any template tag you want and use it in any template you have.

#### Notes

> 1. If wile trying this you have an error that shows `Site matching query does not exist.`, you can solve it by adding `SITE_ID = 1` to your settings.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. If while trying this you have an error that shows `Site matching query does not exist.`, you can solve it by adding `SITE_ID = 1` to your settings.
```

> 2. When you create your own templatetags make sure that the main app is added in the `INSTALLED_APP` list in your settings.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. When you create your own templatetags make sure that the main app is added in the `INSTALLED_APPS` list in your settings.
```

### Summary

> This finishes a blog post divided into two parts. This last part talked about some very useful features that you can have with dj-rest-auth and how to solve the possible upcoming errors. First I have shown you how to implement email validation at signup, and how to customize the emails that are sent by your app. Then I talked about the reset password functionality, and finally how to customize the templates with your own desired values. I recommend using the presented package because it solves lot's of common problems and provides a set of features that are very important for the most of the existent applications. Maybe in the future you can not only use it but also contribute to it.

Reviewer 3: Lots instead of "lot's"

> This finishes a blog post divided into two parts. This last part talked about some very useful features that you can have with dj-rest-auth and how to solve the possible upcoming errors. First I have shown you how to implement email validation at signup, and how to customize the emails that are sent by your app. Then I talked about the reset password functionality, and finally how to customize the templates with your own desired values. I recommend using the presented package because it solves lots of common problems and provides a set of features that are very important for the most of the existent applications. Maybe in the future you can not only use it but also contribute to it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This article discussed some very useful features that you can have with dj-rest-auth and how to solve the possible upcoming errors. I have shown you how to implement email validation at signup, and how to customize the emails that are sent by your app. We learned about the reset password functionality, and finally how to customize the templates with your own desired values. I recommend using the presented package because it solves lots of common problems and provides a set of features that are very important for the most of the existent applications. Maybe in the future, you can not only use it but also contribute to it.
```
